Information Retrieval Systems

Information retrieval (IR) is the activity of obtaining information system resources that are relevant to an information need from a collection of those resources. Searches can be based on full-text or other content-based indexing.

Information retrieval is the science of searching for information in a document, searching for documents themselves, and also searching for the metadata that describes data, and for databases of texts, images or sounds.

Key Concepts in Information Retrieval:

1. Inverted Index
An inverted index is a database index storing a mapping from content, such as words or numbers, to its locations in a document or a set of documents. The purpose of an inverted index is to allow fast full-text searches, at a cost of increased processing when a document is added to the database.

2. TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency)
TF-IDF is a numerical statistic that is intended to reflect how important a word is to a document in a collection or corpus. It is often used as a weighting factor in searches of information retrieval, text mining, and user modeling.

3. Vector Space Model (VSM)
The vector space model is an algebraic model for representing text documents as vectors of identifiers. It is used in information filtering, information retrieval, indexing and relevancy rankings.

4. BM25 (Best Match 25)
BM25 is a bag-of-words retrieval function that ranks a set of documents based on the query terms appearing in each document, regardless of their proximity within the document. It is a family of scoring functions with slightly different components and parameters.

5. Precision and Recall
Precision is the fraction of retrieved documents that are relevant to the query. Recall is the fraction of the relevant documents that are successfully retrieved.

Applications of Information Retrieval:
- Web search engines (Google, Bing, Yahoo)
- Document management systems
- Digital libraries
- Email search
- Legal document search
- Medical information retrieval
